New blog post: "Prefetch resources to speed up future navigations" (#1468)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/fast/codelab-two-ways-to-prefetch/index.md

---
layout: codelab
title: "Two ways to prefetch: <link> tags and HTTP headers"
authors:
  - demianrenzulli
description: |

>   In this codelab, learn how to improve the performance of a page by prefetching resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Learn how to speed up future navigations by prefetching resources.
```

> date: 2019-00-04

Reviewer 2: Suggest using the 12th

The sample app is a website that has a promotional landing page with a special discount for the shop's best selling t-shirt. Since the landing page links to a single product, it's safe to assume that a high percentage of users will navigate to the product details page. This makes the product page a great candidate to prefetch on the landing page.

## Measure performance

First establish the baseline performance:

{% Instruction 'remix', 'ol' %}
{% Instruction 'preview', 'ol' %}
{% Instruction 'devtools-network', 'ol' %}

1. In the **Throttling** drop-down list, select **Fast 3G** to simulate a slow connection type.
1. To load the product page, click **Buy now** in the sample app.

The `product-details.html` page takes about 600 ms to load:

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-one.png" alt="Network panel showing load times for product-details.html">

## Prefetch the product page with `<link rel="prefetch">`

To improve navigation, insert a `prefetch` tag in the landing page to prefetch the `product-details.html` page:

- Add the following `<link>` element to the head of the `views/index.html` file:

> ```html/7

Reviewer: Can you please switch to green code highlighting wherever you are adding new lines? I think yellow should be reserved for just highlight the existing code if you want to explain something. You can find instructions here https://web.dev/handbook/markup-code/#code-highlighting

Reviewer 3: Actually, you only get the green when you're doing a delete-and-replace. If you're just highlighting a new line, yellow is your only option.

Reviewer: Last time I tried it was possible, here's an example: https://web.dev/codelab-extract-and-inline-critical-css/#configure-critical

If that pattern is deprecated or if green vs. yellow highlighting is not important, feel free to close these comments.

Reviewer: Verified that green highlighting is the way to go, here's the code snippet used in the example above:

`js/1-14/`

cc @mfriesenhahn to consider adding this pattern to the handbook.

Author: I thought the same as @mfriesenhahn, but turns out @mihajlija works! Adding this.

Author: Also: I've noticed that when highlighting JS, it colors the code inside the <script></script> tags, but not the tags. Wondering if this is intentional or a bug cc // @robdodson

To verify that prefetching is working:

{% Instruction 'preview', 'ol' %}
{% Instruction 'devtools-network', 'ol' %}

1. In the **Throttling** drop-down list, select **Fast 3G** to simulate a slow connection type.
1. Clear the Disable cache checkbox.
{% Instruction 'reload-app', 'ol' %}

Now when the landing page loads, the `product-details.html` page loads too, but at the lowest priority:

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-two.png" alt="Network panel showing product-details.html prefetched.">

The page is kept in the [HTTP cache](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Caching) for five minutes, after which the normal [`Cache-Control`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP/Headers/Cache-Control) rules for the document apply. In this case, `product-details.html` has  a `cache-control` header with a value of `public, max-age=0`, which means that the page is kept for a total of five minutes.

### Reevaluate performance

{% Instruction 'reload-app', 'ol' %}
1. To load the product page, click **Buy now** in the sample app.

Take a look at the **Network** panel. There are two differences compared to the initial network trace:

> - The **Size** column shows "prefetch cache", which means this resource was  retrieved from the browser's cache rather than the network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The **Size** column shows "prefetch cache", which means this resource was retrieved from the browser's cache rather than the network.
```

## Extra credit: Use `prefetch` as a progressive enhancement

Prefetching is best implemented as a progressive enhancement for the users who are browsing on fast connections. You can use the [Network Information API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Network_Information_API) to check the network conditions and based on that dynamically inject prefetch tags. That way, you can minimize data consumption and save costs for users on slow or expensive data plans.

To implement adaptive prefetching, first remove the `<link rel="prefetch">` tag from `views/index.html`:

```html//6
<!doctype html>
  <html>
    <head>
       <meta charset="UTF-8">
       <meta name="viewport" content="width=device-width, initial-scale=1.0">
       <link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css?family=Montserrat&display=swap" rel="stylesheet">
	   <link rel="prefetch" href="/product-details.html" as="document"> 
	   ...
	</head>
```

Then add the following code to `public/script.js` to declare a function that dynamically injects the `prefetch` tag when the user is on a fast connection:

> ```js

Reviewer: I suggest to highlight this entire code block in green

function injectLinkPrefetchIn4g(url) { 
	if (window.navigator.connection.effectiveType === '4g') { 
		//generate link prefetch tag 
		const linkTag = document.createElement('link'); 
		linkTag.rel = 'prefetch'; 
		linkTag.href = url; 
		linkTag.as = 'document'; 

		//inject tag in the head of the document 
		document.head.appendChild(linkTag); 
	} 
}
```

The function works as follows:

- It checks the [effectiveType](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/NetworkInformation/effectiveType) property of the [Network Information API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Network_Information_API) to determine if the user is on a 4G (or faster) connection.
- If that condition is fulfilled, it generates a `<link>` tag with `prefetch` as the type of hint, passes the URL that will be prefetched in the `href` attribute, and indicates that the resource is an HTML `document` in the `as` attribute.
- Finally, it injects the script dynamically in the `head` of the page.

Next add `script.js` to `views/index.html`, just before the closing `</body>` tag:

> ```html/2

Reviewer: Switch to green highlight here too.

<body>
      ...
      <script src="/script.js"></script>
</body>

```

Requesting `script.js` at the end of the page ensures that it will be loaded and executed after the page is parsed and loaded.

To make sure that the prefetching doesn't interfere with critical resources for the current page, add the following code snippet to call `injectLinkPrefetchIn4g()` on the `window.load` event:

> ```html/4-7

Reviewer: Green highlighting for added code here too.

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-four.png" alt="Network panel showing product-details.html prefetched.">

To verify that the product page isn't prefetched on slow connections:

1. In the Throttling drop-down list, select **Slow 3G**.
{% Instruction 'reload-app', 'ol' %}

The **Network** panel should include only the resources for the landing page without `product-details.html`:

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-five.png" alt="Network panel showing product-details.html not being prefetched.">

## Prefetch the stylesheet for the product page with the HTTP `Link` header

The HTTP `Link` header can be used to prefetch the same type of resources as the `link` tag. Deciding when to use one or the other mostly depends on your preference, as the difference in performance is insignificant. In this case, you'll use it to prefetch the main CSS of the product page, to further improve its rendering.

Add an HTTP `Link` header for `style-product.css` in the server response for the landing page:

1. Open the `server.js` file and look for the `get()` handler for the root url: `/`.
1. Add the following line at the beginning of the handler:

> ```js/1

Reviewer: Green highlight instead of yellow here too.

app.get('/', function(request, response) {
	response.set('Link', '</style-product.css>; rel=prefetch');
	response.sendFile(__dirname + '/views/index.html');
});
```

{% Instruction 'preview', 'ol' %}
{% Instruction 'devtools-network', 'ol' %}
{% Instruction 'reload-app', 'ol' %}

The `style-product.css` is now prefetched at the lowest priority after the landing page loads:

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-six.png" alt="Network panel showing style-product.css prefetched.">

> Navigate to the product page by clicking **Buy now**. Take a look at the **Network** panel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To navigate to the product page, click **Buy now**. Take a look at the **Network** panel:
```

<img class="w-screenshot" src="./network-panel-seven.png" alt="Network panel showing style-product.css retrieved from prefetch cache.">

> The `style-product.css` file was retrieved from the "prefetch cache" and it took only 12 ms to load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `style-product.css` file is retrieved from the "prefetch cache" and it took only 12 ms to load.
```
